The Reactive Manifesto
----------------------

There are organisations which are working in different domains who are independently discovering similar patterns for building more robust, resilient, and flexible software. These systems are better positioned to meet modern demands than the previous commonly accepted systems. 

These changes are happening because application requirements have changed dramatically in recent years. Only a few years ago a large application had tens of servers, seconds of response time, hours of offline maintenance and gigabytes of data. Today's applications are deployed on everything from mobile devices to cloud-based clusters running thousands of multi-core processors. Users expect millisecond response times and 100% uptime. Data is measured in Petabytes. Today's demands are simply not met by yesterday’s software architectures.

We believe that a coherent approach to systems architecture is needed, and we believe that all necessary aspects are already recognised individually: we want systems that are Responsive, Resilient, Elastic and Message Driven. We call these Reactive Systems.

Systems built as Reactive Systems are more flexible, loosely-coupled and [scalable](/glossary#Scalability). This makes them easier to develop and easier to change. They are significantly more tolerant of [failure](/glossary#Failure) and when failure does occur they greet it with elegance rather than disaster. Reactive Systems are highly responsive, giving [users](/glossary#User) interactive feedback. 

*Reactive Systems are:*

* <a name="Responsive"></a>**Responsive**: *The [system](/glossary#System) responds in a timely manner.* Responsiveness is the cornerstone of usability and utility, but more than that, responsiveness means that problems may be detected quickly and dealt with effectively. Responsive systems focus on providing rapid and consistent response times, pressing the upper limits of reliability so they deliver a consistent quality of service. This consistent behaviour in turn simplifies error handling, builds end user confidence, and encourages further interaction. 
* <a name="Resilient"></a>**Resilient**: *The system stays responsive in spite of [failure](/glossary#Failure).* This applies not only to highly-available, mission critical systems — any system that is not resilient will be unresponsive after a failure. Resilience is achieved by [replication](/glossary#Replication), containment, [isolation](/glossary#Isolation) and [delegation](/glossary#Delegation). Failures are contained within each [component](/glossary#Component), isolating components from each other and thereby ensuring that parts of the system can fail and recover without compromising the system as a whole. Recovery of each component is delegated to another (external) component and high-availability is ensured by replication where necessary. The client of a component is not burdened with handling its failures.
* <a name="Elastic"></a>**Elastic**: *The system stays responsive under varying workload.* Reactive Systems can react to changes in the input rate by increasing or decreasing the [resources](/glossary#Resource) allocated. This implies designs that have no contention points or central bottlenecks, resulting in the ability to separate or replicate different components and distribute inputs among them. Reactive Systems support predictive, as well as Reactive, scaling algorithms by providing relevant live performance measures. They achieve [elasticity](/glossary#Elasticity) in a cost-effective way on commodity hardware and software platforms.
* <a name="Message-Driven"></a>**Message Driven**: *Reactive Systems rely on [asynchronous](/glossary#Asynchronous) [message-passing](/glossary#Message-Driven).* This establishes a boundary between components which ensures loose coupling, isolation, [location transparency](/glossary#Location-Transparency), and provides the means to delegate [errors](/glossary#Failure) as messages. Using explicit message-passing enables load management, elasticity, and flow control by shaping and monitoring the message queues in the system and applying [back-pressure](/glossary#Back-Pressure) when necessary. Location-transparent messaging, as a means of communication, makes it possible for the management of failure to work with the same constructs and semantics across a cluster or within a single host. [Non-blocking](/glossary#Non-Blocking) communication allows recipients to only consume [resources](/glossary#Resource) while active, leading to less system overhead.

Large systems are composed of smaller ones and therefore depend on the Reactive properties of their constituents. This means that Reactive Systems apply design principles so these properties apply at all levels of scale, making them composable. The largest systems in the world rely upon architectures based on these properties and serve the needs of billions of people daily. 

We believe is time to spread these ideas so as to apply these design principles consciously from the start instead of rediscovering them each time.

[Sign the manifesto](http://www.reactivemanifesto.org/#sign-button)
